docs/source/index.rst, before:

Discorpy's documentation
========================

Discorpy is an open-source Python package for correcting radial distortion
with sub-pixel accuracy as required by tomography detector systems :cite:`Vo:2015`.
It is used to calculate parameters of a correction model, which are the center
of distortion and the polynomial coefficients, using a grid pattern image. From
version 1.4, perspective distortion correction and methods for processing
line-pattern and chessboard (checkerboard) images were added to the package.

A key feature of Discorpy is that radial distortion, the center of distortion,
and perspective distortion are determined and corrected independently using a
single calibration image. Discorpy was developed for calibrating lens-coupled
detectors of tomography systems but it also can be used for commercial cameras.

**Showcases**: https://discorpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html#demonstrations

.. image:: img/index/showcase.png
  :width: 100 %
  :align: center

**Source code:** https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/discorpy

**Author:** Nghia T. Vo - NSLS-II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, US; Diamond Light Source, UK.

**Keywords:** Camera calibration, radial lens distortion, perspective distortion,
distortion correction, tomography.

Contents
========


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :numbered:

   install
   tutorials
   usage
   api
   credit

Commit message:

Add new methods published on JOSR, fisheye calibration methods

docs/source/index.rst, after:

Discorpy's documentation
========================

Discorpy is an open-source Python package implementing methods for calibrating and correcting distortion
in lens-based imaging systems :cite:`Vo:2015` :cite:`Vo:2025`. Unlike existing approaches that require multiple calibration
images or iterative optimization, Discorpy and its algorithms can independently characterize both radial and
perspective distortion with high accuracy across a wide range of distortion strengths—using only a single calibration
image and direct computation. This makes the software a practical tool for a wide range of imaging applications.

To support different experimental conditions and enable fully automated workflows, Discorpy offers flexibility in
calibration patterns, including dot-pattern, line-pattern, and chessboard images. It also provides robust preprocessing
methods for extracting reference points, handling image artifacts, and grouping points into lines. Discorpy has been
successfully applied to calibrate detectors in X-ray tomography systems, where sub-pixel accuracy is critical,
as well as to correct fisheye distortion in large-field-of-view cameras.

**Showcases**: https://discorpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html#demonstrations

.. image:: img/index/showcase.png
    :width: 100 %
    :align: center

**Source code:** https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/discorpy

**Author:** Nghia T. Vo - NSLS-II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, US; Diamond Light Source, UK.

**Keywords:** Camera calibration, radial lens distortion, perspective distortion,
distortion correction, fisheye distortion, distortion center determination, tomography.

Contents
========


.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 3
    :numbered:

    install
    tutorials
    usage
    notes
    api
    credit
